  Manufacturing
Facilities Design and
 Material Handling
        FIFTH Edition




      Matthew P. Stephens
        Fred E. Meyers




         Purdue University Press
         West Lafayette, Indiana
Credits and acknowledgments borrowed from other sources and reproduced, with permission, in this
textbook appear on appropriate page within text. Unless otherwise stated, all figures and tables belong
to the authors.

Copyright © 2013 by Matthew P. Stephens. All rights reserved. Manufactured in the United States of
America. This publication is protected by Copyright, and permission should be obtained from the pub-
lisher prior to any prohibited reproduction, storage in a retrieval system, or transmission in any form or
by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or likewise.

Many of the designations by manufacturers and sellers to distinguish their products are claimed as
­trademarks. Where those designations appear in this book, and the publisher was aware of a trade-
 mark claim, the designations have been printed in initial caps or all caps.

This book was previously published by: Pearson Education, Inc.




Cataloging-in-Publication data on file at the Library of Congress.

ISBN-13: 978-1-55753-650-1
ISBN-10: 1-55753-650-3
To my son Ethan
Preface

   The fifth edition of Manufacturing Facilities Design and Material Handling
   embraces the same practical approach to facilities planning as the previous edi-
   tions. Building on the same systematic approach, it expands upon an important
   and relevant topic of lean manufacturing. In addition to a rich collection of
   discussion questions and problems that follow each chapter, a comprehensive
   case study has been added. This case study is presented as an Appendix and
   clearly illustrates the step-by-step approach in facilities planning as explained
   in the textbook, leading to the development of a complete example of a facility
   design and layout.
        Layout-iQ, a state-of-the-art facilities planning and simulation software package
   is introduced in this edition, and access to the software is included for purchasers
   of the book.
        The goals of this project-oriented facilities design and material handling
   textbook are to provide students and practitioners with a practical resource that
   describes the techniques and procedures for developing an efficient facility layout,
   and to introduce some of the state-of-the-art tools such as computer simulation.
        This how-to book leads the reader through the collection, analysis, and develop-
   ment of vital and relevant data to produce a functional plant layout. Our systematic
   and methodical approach allows the novice to follow along step-by-step. However,
   the textbook has been structured so that it may also be used easily and productively
   by more experienced planners and serve as a useful guide and reference.
        The mathematical background and requirements have been intentionally kept
   at the level of high school algebra. Although quantitative analyses and the manipu-
   lation of numbers are extremely important for planning an efficient facility, these
   skills can be developed without confusing the process with obscure mathematical
   procedures.
        Some experience with computers and computer-aided design (CAD) software
   packages will prove beneficial for the facilities planner and for other professionals
   in manufacturing and technology. Those techniques are discussed and emphasized.
        On the average, a manufacturing facility will undergo some layout modification
   and change once every 18 months. Furthermore, the efficiency, productivity, and
   profitability of any given enterprise are directly correlated with the efficiency of the
   layout and the material handling systems. Thus, individuals with skills in this area
   are in demand and are well compensated.
        The design of the facility and material handling systems starts with collecting
   data from various departments. Chapter 2 describes the sources and the significance
                                                                                         v
vi   preface



     of this information. The marketing department provides data on various customer
     requirements that determine production volume and various manufacturing capa-
     bilities. The product engineering department supplies engineering drawings and
     bills of materials, and assists with equipment requirement determination. Inventory
     and investment policies are determined according to management policies which
     in turn dictate space requirements, make or buy decisions, production start dates,
     and so on.
          Among the most basic and fundamental data are principles of time and motion
     economy and time standards. On the basis of this information, machine and per-
     sonnel requirements are calculated, assembly lines are balanced, and workload in
     manufacturing cells are leveled. Chapter 3 introduces the reader to the concepts of
     motion and time study.
          Chapter 4 describes the development of route sheets, the sequence of opera-
     tions, assembly charts, assembly line balancing, and fraction equipment calculation.
     Use of computer simulation has also been added. Chapter 5 analyzes material flow
     to ensure proper placement of machines and departments to minimize costs. Seven
     techniques are discussed in the chapter, as well as the use of computer-aided flow
     design and analysis.
          Chapter 6 describes the activity relationship diagram. The importance of rela-
     tionships among departments, people, offices, and services, and their effect on the
     layout is explored. The activity relationship leads to the creation of the dimension-
     less block diagram.
          Space calculation and ergonomic considerations are major and significant
     aspects of facilities planning. Chapter 7 discusses workstation design, Chapter 8 cov-
     ers auxiliary services’ space requirements, Chapter 9 discusses employee services’
     space requirements, and Chapter 12 covers office layout techniques and space
     requirements.
          The dimensionless block diagram, which was developed in Chapter 6, is used as
     a guide to area allocation and is discussed in Chapter 13. The area allocation proce-
     dure results in an area allocation diagram. At this point, a plot plan and a detailed
     layout are created. Chapter 14 discusses various layout construction techniques.
          Many other functions require space. Some of these areas need as much space
     as the production department. The stores and warehouse departments are good
     examples. Good analysis and knowledge of design criteria can save much space and
     promote efficiency of both personnel and equipment. Other functions and spaces
     such as receiving, shipping, lunchroom, restrooms, first-aid rooms, and offices need
     careful consideration by the facilities planner. The location and size of each activity
     can have an effect on the overall operational efficiency. Chapters 8, 9, and 12 are
     dedicated to these topics.
          Material handling systems are discussed in Chapters 10 and 11. The reader
     is introduced to new and exciting material handling concepts and equipment.
     Application of automatic identification and data capture (AIDC) and ergonomic
     considerations are emphasized. The reader is encouraged to integrate material
     handling with other functions to increase productivity and efficiency.
        vii
	Preface



    Chapter 15 discusses the concept of simulation and introduces the reader to
various applications and the power of computer simulation in the facilities plan-
ning arena. Some state-of-the-art simulation software packages are introduced to
the reader, and case studies are discussed. As stated earlier, access to Layout-iQ is
provided for hands-on application and use of layout design software.
    Chapter 16 covers selling the layout through a project report and oral presenta-
tion, an important part of any project.
    The resultant facility design is only as good as the data and the data analyses
upon which the plan has been based. Probably no single factor affects the opera-
tional efficiency and safety of an enterprise more than its layout and material han-
dling system.


                                                                 Matthew P. Stephens
                                                                      Fred E. Meyers
Acknowledgments

  I would like to express my gratitude to the reviewers and the wonderful staff at
  Purdue University Press whose generous help, efforts, and guidance has made the
  fifth edition of the Manufacturing Facilities Design and Material Handling a reality.
  A very special note of gratitude goes to Mr. Nelson E. Lee and Rapid Modeling
  Corporation for generously and kindly providing the users of this edition with links
  to Layout-iQ, a state-of-the-art simulation and planning software. I would like to
  acknowledge and thank Manny Cuevas, Michael Thoma, Bryan Orozco, Jarrett
  Hullinger, and Ben Unger for their hard work and efforts in developing the S. S.
  Turbo Manufacturing case study. I would like to express a heartfelt “thank-you” to
  Mr. Shaharyar Masood for his tireless and invaluable assistance with the necessary
  research and development of this edition.
                                                                   Matthew P. Stephens




                                                                                     ix
	Contents
  Chapter Title xi




About the Authors

   Matthew P. Stephens, Ph.D., CQE, is a Professor and Faculty Scholar in the
   Department of Technology Leadership and Innovation at Purdue University, where
   he teaches graduate and undergraduate courses in facilities planning, statistical
   quality control, and total productive maintenance (TPM). Dr. Stephens holds
   undergraduate and graduate degrees from Southern Illinois University and the
   University of Arkansas, with specialization in operations management and statistics.
       Prior to joining academe, Dr. Stephens spent 9 years with several manufactur-
   ing and business enterprises, including flatbed trailer, and washer and dryer manu-
   facturers. He has been extensively involved as a consultant with a number of major
   manufacturing companies.
       Dr. Stephens has numerous publications in the areas of simulation, quality
   and productivity, and lean production systems. He has served various professional
   organizations, including the Association of Technology, Management, and Applied
   Engineering (ATMAE) and the American Society for Quality (ASQ), where he
   obtained his Certified Quality Engineering and Six Sigma Black Belt training.
   Dr. Stephens is also the author of the Productivity and Reliability-Based Maintenance
   Management textbook (Purdue University Press, 2010).

   Fred E. Meyers, PE, is president of Fred Meyers and Associates, an industrial engi-
   neering management consulting company. Mr. Meyers is a registered professional
   industrial engineer and a senior member of the Institute of Industrial Engineers. He
   is a Professor Emeritus in the College of Engineering at Southern Illinois University–
   Carbondale.




                                                                                       xi
Contents

Chapter 1   Introduction to Manufacturing Facilities Design
            and Material Handling  1
            Objectives  1
            The Importance of Manufacturing Facilities Design and Material Handling  1
            Lean Thinking and Lean Manufacturing  4
            The Goals of Manufacturing Facilities Design and Material Handling  6
            The Manufacturing Facilities Design Procedure  12
            Types and Sources of Manufacturing Facilities Design Projects  14
            Computers and Simulation in Manufacturing Facilities Design  15
              ISO 9000 and Facilities Planning  16
            Glossary of Some Major Terms and Concepts in Facilities Planning  18
            Questions  21


Chapter 2   Sources of Information for Manufacturing
            Facilities Design  22
            Objectives  22
            The Marketing Department  23
              Determining Takt Time or Plant Rate  24
              Calculating Scrap and Rework Rates  25
            The Product Design Department  27
              The Indented Bill of Material   32
            Management Policy Information  36
              Inventory Policy  36
              Lean Thinking and Muda as Part of Management Policy  36
              Investment Policy  37
              Startup Schedule  37
              Make or Buy Decisions  38
              Organizational Relationships  39
              Feasibility Studies  39
            Conclusion  40
            Questions  41

                                                                                         xiii
xiv   contents



Chapter 3   Time Study  42
            Objectives  42
            What is a Time Standard?  43
            The Importance and Uses of Time Study  44
              1. How Many Machines Do We Need?  46
              2. How Many People Should We Hire?  47
              3. How Much Will Our Product Cost?  50
              4. When Should We Start a Job, and How Much Work Can We Handle with the
                 Equipment and People We Have? Or, How Do We Schedule and Load Machines, Work
                 Centers, Departments, and Plants?  51
              5. How Do We Determine the Assembly Line Balance and the Conveyor Belt Speed,
                 Load the Work Cells with the Correct Amount of Work, and Balance the
                 Work Cells?  52
              6. How Do We Measure Productivity?  53
              7. How Can We Pay Our People for Outstanding Performance?  54
              8. How Can We Select the Best Method or Evaluate Cost Reduction
                 Ideas?  55
              9. How Do We Evaluate New Equipment Purchases to Justify Their
                 Expense?  57
              10. How Do We Develop a Personnel Budget?  57
            Techniques of Time Study  57
              Predetermined Time Standards Systems  58
              Stopwatch Time Study  58
            Time Study Procedure and the Step-by-Step Form  62
              Rating, Leveling, and Normalizing  71
            Allowances  73
               Types of Allowances  73
               Methods of Applying Allowances  77
               Work Sampling  80
               Standard Data  81
               Expert Opinion Time Standards and Historical Data  82
            Time Standards for Manufacturing Facilities Design  83
            Questions  84

Chapter 4   Process Design  86
            Objectives  86
            Fabrication: Making the Individual Parts  87
               Route Sheets  87
               The Number of Machines Needed  91
            Work Cell Load Chart  92
              Step-by-Step Procedure for Preparing a Work Cell Load Chart  94
         xv
	Contents


            Assembly and Packout Process Analysis  97
               The Assembly Chart  97
               Time Standards for Every Task  97
               Plant Rate and Conveyor Speed  97
               Paint Conveyor Speed  99
               Assembly Line Balancing  101
            Step-by-Step Procedure for Completing the Assembly Line
                  Balancing Form  105
            Calculating the Efficiency of the Assembly Line  108
               Use of Computer Simulation  109
            Layout Orientation  112
            Questions  113


Chapter 5   Flow Analysis Techniques  115
            Objectives  115
            Fabrication of Individual Parts  119
               String Diagram  119
               Multicolumn Process Chart  121
               From-To Chart  123
               Process Chart  125
               Step-by-Step Description for the Process Chart  127
            Total Plant Flow  131
              Flow Diagrams  131
              Step-by-Step Procedure for Developing a Flow Diagram  134
              The Operations Chart  135
              Step-by-Step Procedure for Preparing an Operations Chart  135
              Flow Process Chart  137
              Step-by-Step Procedure for Preparing a Flow Process Chart  139
            Computer-Aided Flow Design and Analysis   139
            Conclusion  144
            Questions  144

Chapter 6   Activity Relationship Analysis  145
            Objectives  145
            Activity Relationship Diagram  146
               Determining the Relationship Code  148
            Worksheet  150
            Dimensionless Block Diagram  150
xvi   contents


            Flow Analysis  153
            Computer-Generated Activity Relationship Chart  153
            Questions  156

Chapter 7   Ergonomics and Workstation Design Space
            Requirements  158
            Objectives  158
            Workstation Design  158
            Ergonomics and the Principles of Motion Economy  160
               Principle 1: Hand Motions  161
               Principle 2: Basic Motion Types  165
               Principle 3: Location of Parts and Tools  166
               Principle 4: Freeing the Hands from as Much Work as Possible  168
               Principle 5: Gravity  169
               Principle 6: Operator Safety and Health Considerations  169
            Space Determination  170
            Questions  173

Chapter 8   Auxiliary Services Requirement Space  174
            Objectives  174
            Receiving and Shipping  174
              Advantages and Disadvantages of Centralized Receiving
                  and Shipping  175
              The Trucking Industry’s Effect on Receiving and Shipping  175
              Functions of a Receiving Department  176
              Facilities Required for a Receiving Department  178
              Space Requirements for a Receiving Department  180
              Functions of a Shipping Department  180
            Storage  186
               Just-in-Time Inventories  188
               Maximizing the Use of the Cubic Space  188
               Providing Immediate Access to Everything (Selectivity)  190
               Providing Safekeeping  199
            Warehousing  199
              Warehouse Design Criteria  200
            Functions of a Warehouse  202
              Procedure for Sales Analysis of ABC Inventory  203
              ABC Inventory Layout of a Hand Tool Manufacturing Company’s Warehouse  204
              Warehouse Space Determination  207
              Warehouse Equipment  209
              Conclusion  209
         xvii
	Contents


             Maintenance and Tool Room  211
             Utilities, Heating, and Air Conditioning   212
             Questions  212

Chapter 9    Employee Services—Space Requirements  214
             Objectives  214
             Parking Lots  215
             Employee Entrance  217
             Locker Rooms  219
             Restrooms and Toilets  220
             Cafeterias or Lunchrooms  220
             Recreational Facilities  225
             Drinking Fountains  225
             Aisles  225
             Medical Facilities  226
             Break Areas and Lounges  228
             Miscellaneous Employee Services  228
             Questions  230

Chapter 10   Material Handling  231
             Objectives  231
             Cost Justification  232
               Sample Material Handling Cost Problem  233
             Goals of Material Handling  234
             Ten Principles of Material Handling  234
               Planning Principle  239
               Systems Principle  241
               Work Principle  242
               Space Utilization Principle  242
               Unit Load Principle  243
               Automation Principle  244
               Standardization Principle  244
             The Material Handling Problem-Solving Procedure  245
             Questions  250
xviii   contents



Chapter 11   Material Handling Equipment  251
             Objectives  251
             Receiving and Shipping  252
               Receiving and Shipping Docks  252
               Dock Equipment  256
               Moving Equipment  256
               Telescopic Conveyor  261
               Weight Scale  263
               Systems Required on Receiving and Shipping Docks  263
             Stores  264
                Storage Units  264
                Stores Mobile Equipment  267
                Systems Required for the Stores Department  269
             Fabrication  273
                Shop Containers  273
                Tubs and Baskets  274
                Workstation Material Handling Devices  278
                Manipulators and Lifting Devices  278
                Mobile Fabrication Equipment  285
             Assembly and Paint  292
                Belt Conveyors  293
                Powered Roller Conveyors  293
                Car-Type Conveyors  294
                Slat Conveyors  294
                Tow Conveyors  295
                Overhead Trolley Conveyors  296
                Power and Free Conveyors  298
             Packout  298
                Box Formers  299
                Automatic Taping, Gluing, and Stapling  299
                Palletizers  301
                Pick and Place Robots  301
                Banding  301
                Stretch Wrap  306
             Warehousing  306
               Picking Carts  306
               Gravity Flow Bins  306
               Tractor-Trailer Picking Carts  306
               Clamp Trucks  306
               Rotary Conveyor Bins  310
               Vertical Warehouse and Picking Cars  310
               Packing Station  312
               Shipping Containers  312
         xix
	Contents


             Bulk Material Handling  315
               Bulk Material Conveyors  316
             Computer-Integrated Material Handling Systems  318
               Cross-Docking and Flow-Through  318
             Questions  324


Chapter   12	Office Layout Techniques and Space
             Requirements  325
             Objectives  325
             Goals of Office Layout Design  326
             Types of Office Space  327
               Supervisors’ Offices  327
               Open Office Space  327
               Conventional Offices  330
               The Modern Office  330
             Special Requirements and Considerations  333
             Techniques of Office Layout  337
               Organizational Chart  338
               Flowchart  339
               Communications Force Diagram  339
               Activity Relationship Diagram  342
               Activity Worksheet  343
               Dimensionless Block Diagram  344
               Office Space Determination  347
               Detailed Master Layout  347
             Questions  349

Chapter 13   Area Allocation  350
             Objectives  350
             Space Requirements Planning  350
               Under the Floor  352
               Overhead or Clear Space Areas  352
               Truss Level  353
               Roof  353
             Building Size Determination  353
             Dimensionless Block Diagram  354
             Area Allocation Procedure  355
             Office Area Allocation  356
             Questions  360
xx     contents


Chapter 14   Facilities Design—the Layout  361
             Objectives  361
             Plot Plan  361
                Plant Layout Methods  364
             Master Plan  365
               Three-Dimensional (3-D) Models  368
               Computer-Aided Design (CAD) Technique  368
               Advanced Computer Systems  369
             Plant Layout Procedure—Toolbox Plant  372
                Office Layout for the Toolbox Plant  375
             Evaluation  377
             Questions  382


Chapter 15   Application of Computer Simulation and Modeling  383
             Objectives  383
             Introduction  383
             Defining Computer Simulation  384
             Advantages and Disadvantages of Simulation  385
             Simulation in Facilities Planning  386
             How Simulation Works  387
             An Overview of Layout and Simulation Software  389
             Computer-Aided Layout Design  389
               Computer-Assisted Layout Performance Analysis  391
             Layout-iQ: Computer-based Workspace Planning  397
                Process-Routing  398
                From-To Trips  399
                Subjective Analysis  399
                Model Building Wizard  400
                Tutorials and Modeling Exercises  401
             Case Studies  401
               Simulation in Manufacturing  401
               Simulation in Health Care  401
               Simulation in Waste Handling  402
             Questions  403

Chapter 16   Selling the Layout  404
             Objectives  404
             The Project Report  404
         xxi
	Contents


 The Presentation  406
 Adjustments  407
 Approval  407
 The Rest of the Project  408
   Sourcing  408
   Installation  408
   Engineering Plot  409
   Production Start  409
   Debugging and Follow-Up  409
 Conclusion  410

 Answers   411

 Appendix   423

 Index   496
                                            c     h    a     p     t    e    r
                                                                                     1


Introduction to Manufacturing
Facilities Design and
Material Handling

     Objectives:
     Upon the completion of this chapter, the reader should:
     • Understand the importance of a systematic approach to facilities planning
     • Be able to define facilities planning and material handling
     • Understand the relationship between facilities planning and lean thinking
     • Be able to identify various types of waste, “muda”
     • Understand the goals of facilities planning and material handling
     • Understand the systematic layout procedure



n The Importance of Manufacturing Facilities
  Design and Material Handling
     Facilities planning is a multi-faceted process, influenced by numerous factors and
     variables which are not always necessarily in concert and at times may even have
     contradictory impact on the decision-making process. One of the fundamental
     aspects of facilities planning is site selection or the location strategy. This decision
     is usually made at the highest corporate level and may be more influenced by such
     factors as economics, i.e. tax incentives, or geopolitical considerations that may
     have very little or no relationship with engineering principles such as proximity to
     raw material or transportation systems that an industrial engineer may consider to
     be guiding factors in site selection.
                                                                                           1
2   Chapter 1



         The factors that may influence the location strategy can vary from the availabil-
    ity of resources such as raw material, energy, and so on, to abundance of human
    resources and lower labor costs. A manufacturing site may be selected based on prox-
    imity to sources of raw material, markets, and transportation systems such as highways,
    railroads, or waterways. It may seem desirable to locate a research facility near a think-
    tank environment such as a research university. However, factors influencing location
    selection are not always quite as altruistic. Incentives to attract production facilities
    vary from corporate tax abatement and low-cost land, to relaxed environmental regu-
    lations. These attractions not only impact plant locations within the United States,
    but also result in migration of these facilities outside of the country.
         Global economy probably has had its biggest impact on the location of manu-
    facturing facilities. Due to various incentives offered by local and state governments,
    not only have we seen a steady migration of manufacturing facilities in a southwardly
    direction in the United States, but also, as trade barriers are eased or completely
    removed, this migration has continued beyond the borders to such far places as India
    or China. It can perhaps be argued that in the past the product market location might
    have been a secondary factor, whereas labor costs and other incentives may have been
    an overriding factor in the plant location decision-making process. With the current
    soaring cost of energy and the resulting expenditures to transport the products to the
    market, it might be interesting to observe at what point the location strategy equation
    may be rewritten. Further discussion of this topic is more appropriate for a political
    science or economics class and is beyond the scope of this text.
         Manufacturing facilities design is the organization of the company’s physical
    assets to promote the efficient use of resources such as people, material, equipment,
    and energy. Facilities design includes plant location, building design, plant layout,
    and material handling systems. As stated above, plant location strategy decisions are
    made at the top corporate level, often for reasons that have little to do with opera-
    tion efficiency or effectiveness, and may not always be an engineering decision.
         Manufacturing facilities design and material handling affect the productivity
    and profitability of a company more than almost any other major corporate deci-
    sion. The quality and cost of the product and, therefore, the supply/demand ratio
    are directly affected by the facility design. A plant layout project (facility design)
    is one of the most challenging and enjoyable projects that an industrial or manu-
    facturing engineer will ever have. The project engineer or, at a higher level, the
    project manager, after receiving corporate approval, will be responsible for spend-
    ing a great deal of money. The project manager will also be held responsible for the
    timely, cost-effective achievement of the goals stated in the project proposal and
    cost budget. The responsibilities of a project manager approach those of a com-
    pany’s president, and only project managers who achieve or beat the stated goals
    will be given bigger projects.
         Building design is an architectural job, thus the architectural firm’s expertise in
    building design and construction techniques is extremely important to the facilities
    design project. The architectural firm will report to the facility design project ­manager.
         Layout is the physical arrangement of production machines and equipment,
    workstations, people, location of materials of all kinds and stages, and material
   Introduction to Manufacturing Facilities Design and Material Handling               3


­handling equipment. The plant layout is the end result of a manufacturing facility
 design project and is the main focus of this book. In addition to the need for devel-
 oping new manufacturing facilities, existing plants undergo some changes continu-
 ally. Major relayouts of plants occur on the average of every 18 months as a result of
 changes in product design, methods, materials, and process.
      Material handling is defined simply as moving material. Improvements in material
 handling have positively affected workers more than any other area of work design
 and ergonomics. Today, physical drudgery has been eliminated from work by mate-
 rial handling equipment. Every expense in business must be cost-justified, and mate-
 rial handling equipment is no exception. The money to pay for material handling
 equipment must come from reduced labor, material, or overhead costs, and these
 expenses must be recovered in 2 years or less (50 percent return on investment [ROI]
 or higher). Chapters 10 and 11 will discuss material handling systems, procedures, and
 equipment. Material handling is so entwined with the physical layout of equipment
 that the two subjects, facilities planning and material handling, are usually treated as
 one subject in practice. As a result, material handling is part of nearly every step of a
 facility design process and material handling equipment choice will affect the layout.
      New manufacturing plant construction is one of the largest expenses that a
 company will ever undertake and the layout will affect the employees for years to
 come. The cost of the plant’s products will be affected as well. Continuing improve-
 ments will be needed to keep the company current and competitive. The need for
continuous improvement and implementation of lean manufacturing concepts is
 discussed throughout the text.
      It is said that if you improve the flow of material, you will automatically reduce
production costs. The shorter the flow is through the plant, the better the reduction
 costs are. Material handling accounts for about 50 percent of all industrial injuries
 and from 40 to 80 percent of all operating costs. The cost of equipment is also high,
 but a proper ROI can be obtained. Keep in mind that many industrial problems can
 be eliminated with material handling equipment. In no area of industrial history has
 more improvement been made than by the use of material handling equipment.
 Today, material handling systems can easily be incorporated with cutting edge tech-
 nologies in automatic data capture equipment and automatic inspection systems for
 a variety of quality and productivity purposes. Item tracking and inventory control
 systems can be implemented as part of the material handling procedures.
      The cost reduction formula is valuable when working with manufacturing facili-
 ties design and material handling. Some examples of a cost reduction formula follow:

                 Ask­         For Every­            So We Can­
                 Why­   Operation­      Eliminate­
                 Who­   Transportation­ Combine­
                 What­  Inspection­     Change sequence­
                 Where­ Storage­        Simplify­
                 When­  Delay­
                 How­
4    Chapter 1



          Facilities planners ask the six questions (column one) about everything that
     can happen to a part flowing through the manufacturing facility (column two)
     to eliminate steps, combine steps, change sequence of steps or simplify (column
     three). This requires studying the company’s products in depth to identify every
     step in the process. The best advice is not to take shortcuts or to skip steps in the
     proposed manufacturing facility design procedure. There are many tools and tech-
     niques to help identify the steps in the process. These are described in detail in the
     following sections.
          Implementing the five (5) S’s and five why’s will also help reduce costs. The
     5 S’s principles are
      1. Sifting (organization).   Keeping the minimum of what is required will save
         space (affects the facility layout), inventory, and money.
      2. Sorting (arrangement).  Everything has a specific place, and everything in its
         place is a visual management philosophy that affects the facility layout.
      3. Sweeping (cleaning).  A clean plant is a result of a facility layout that has been
         thought to provide room for everything.
      4. Spick and span (hygiene).   A safe plant is a result of good layout planning.
      5. Strict (discipline).   Following the procedures and standardized methods and
         making them a habit will keep the plant operating efficiently and safely.
         The five why’s will ensure that the solution to a problem is not a symptom of
     the problem, but rather, the base cause. For example: A machine broke down.
      1. Why?
      2. The machine jammed up. Why?
      3. The machine was not cleaned. Why?
      4. The operator didn’t clean it out at regular intervals. Why?
      5. Was it because of lack of training? Why?
      6. The supervisors forgot. They make a written instruction to be mounted on the
         machine. It will not happen again.
     The planners could have asked six or seven why’s. The important thing is to arrive
     at a final solution that will eliminate the problem from occurring again.


n Lean Thinking and Lean Manufacturing
     A new vocabulary has developed in the past few years that stems from the Toyota
     production system and a book titled Lean Thinking by James Womack and Daniel
     Jones. Lean manufacturing is a concept whereby all production people work
     together to eliminate waste. Industrial engineers, industrial technologists, and
     other groups within management have been attempting this since the beginning
     of the industrial revolution, but with a well-educated, motivated production work-
     force, modern manufacturing management has discovered the advantage of seek-
     ing the workforce’s help in eliminating waste. The Japanese word for waste is muda,
     which is the focus of much attention all over the world. Who knows better than the
   Introduction to Manufacturing Facilities Design and Material Handling          5


 production employee—who spends 8 hours a day on a job—how to reduce waste?
 The goal is to tap this resource by giving production employees the best tools
­available.
     Muda (waste) is defined as any expense that does not help produce value.
 There are eight kinds of muda: overproduction, waiting, transportation, process-
 ing, inventory, motion, rework, and poor people utilization. The goal is to try to
eliminate or reduce these costs. One of the techniques for doing this is asking “why”
five times (five why’s). Asking “why” about any problem or cost at least five times
attempts to get to the root cause of the problem.
     Toyota’s employees are encouraged to stop the production line or process if a
problem exists. A lighted visual indicator board (called an andon) is located above
the production line. When operations are normal, a green light is on. A yellow light
indicates an operator needs help, and if the operator needs to turn off the line, a
red light flashes. The term autonomation ( jidoka) has been coined to indicate the
transmission of the human element into automation. An example is the employee
turning off the production line if a problem is detected.
     In the culture of continuous improvement, kaizen is another effective tool that
can be easily applied to different aspects of facilities planning and material han-
dling. Kaizen is the Japanese word for constant, or continuous, improvement. The
main element of kaizen is the people involved in the improvement process. Kaizen
touches upon all levels of the organization and requires the participation of all
employees—from the top management throughout various levels of the organiza-
tional chart and production teams. Every person in the company is encouraged to
search for new ideas and opportunities to further improve the organization and its
processes including reducing waste.
     One of the requirements of kaizen that has been found particularly effective
is the need to begin improvements immediately other than waiting until there is a
sound plan in place. Kaizen differs from reengineering by the level of change that
happens at one time; there are no major breakthroughs with kaizen. Some criticize
kaizen because the process makes only small improvements at a time which may, in
some cases, lead to further problems.
     Kanban is another technique that affects manufacturing facilities design.
Kanban is a signal board that communicates the need for material and visually tells
the operator to produce another unit or quantity. The kanban system, also referred
to as a “pull” system, differs from the traditional inventory “push” systems such as
just-in-time ( JIT) or material requirements planning (MRP). With push systems,
parts are produced only when the need arises and they have been requested or
there is “pull” from production operations.
     Value-stream mapping (VSM) is a major waste reduction and productivity
improvement tool that an organization can employ to evaluate its processes. Value-
stream mapping can be defined as the process of assessment of each component or
the step of production to determine the extent to which it contributes to opera-
tional efficiency or product quality. Value-stream mapping is clearly linked with and
is an important component of lean manufacturing. Using the tools and resources of
VSM, a company can document and develop the flow of information and material
6    Chapter 1



     through the system as an aid in eliminating non-value-added operations or com-
     ponents, reducing costs, and making the necessary improvements. This continu-
     ous improvement process goes through three repeating stages: assessment, analysis,
     and adjustment. Through these three stages, changes and modifications can be
     made to further improve the process and eliminate waste.
          The advantages in using value-stream mapping are numerous. They include
     improved profitability, efficiency, and productivity for the company or institution.
     Particular to facilities design and material handling, VSM can clearly reduce or
     eliminate excessive material handling, eliminate wasted space, create a better con-
     trol of all forms of inventories (e.g., raw materials, in-process, and finished goods),
     and streamline various production steps.


n The Goals of Manufacturing Facilities Design
  and Material Handling
       A good set of goals ensures a successful facility design. Without goals, facilities
       p
       ­ lanners are without direction and a primary mission statement is the first step.
       A well-thought-out mission statement ensures that the project engineer or man-
       ager and the company’s management share the same visions and objectives for the
       project. It also opens communication lines between management and designer:
       Feedback and suggested changes at this early stage save much work and even head-
       aches later on.
             A mission statement communicates the primary goals and the culture of the
       organization to the facilities planner. The mission statement defines the purpose
       for the existence of the enterprise. The statement should be short enough so that
       its essence is not lost and can be easily remembered, and it must be timeless so that
       it is easily adaptable to the organizational changes. For the most part, the mission
       statement is a philosophical statement that sets the cultural tone of the organiza-
       tion. The mission of a corporation must go beyond expectation of profits and prof-
       itability for its shareholders; as a member of the society, it should strive to extend
       these benefits to its customers and employees. A company may state its mission
       as follows: “ACME is dedicated to the pursuit of manufacturing the safest, high-
       est quality, and the most reliable bicycles while maintaining the lowest possible
       price and a strongest commitment to customer satisfaction. ACME recognizes that
      it is only through strong commitment to our employees that we can achieve our
     ­mission.”
             Although the mission statement is developed by the corporate management, it
      provides a clear signal and a guiding light for developing strategies at all levels of
     the company activities including the design of the physical facilities. For example,
     a mission statement that signals a strong commitment to employee development
     and training, communicates the need for such facilities in the overall design of the
       plant layout.
             Production goals and objectives that are consistent with the mission of the
      ­corporation can then be derived from the mission statement.
   Introduction to Manufacturing Facilities Design and Material Handling                 7


    Subgoals are added to help achieve specific goals. Potential goals may include
 1. Minimize unit and project costs.
 2. Optimize quality.
 3. Promote the effective use of (a) people, (b) equipment, (c) space, and
    (d) energy.
 4. Provide for (a) employee convenience, (b) employee safety, and (c) employee
    comfort.
 5. Control project costs.
 6. Achieve the production start date.
 7. Build flexibility into the plan.
 8. Reduce or eliminate excessive inventory.
 9. Achieve miscellaneous goals.
     A mission statement should be simple and should be used to keep the facilities
planner on track and to help in all project decisions. As planner, your goal is to
provide a specific number of quality units per period of time at the lowest possible
cost—not to show off your advanced manufacturing knowledge or to have a show-
place for your computers and robots. The mission statement intends to remind you
to stay on track, and will assist your decision making along the process.
     Let us take a closer look at the subgoals:
     1.   Minimize unit and project costs. This means that every dollar expended in
excess of the most economical method of getting into production must be cost-
justified. It does not mean buying the cheapest machine because the most expensive
 machine may produce the lowest unit cost. When products are new, production
­volume may be low. Not much can be spent on advanced manufacturing technol-
ogy, but you still need equipment. This is when you buy the cheapest ones available.
     2.   Optimize quality. Quality is critical and difficult to measure. Everyone knows
 that a near-perfect car is available—a Rolls-Royce—but how many can you sell? You
can make a better product if you buy better materials, machine closer tolerances,
add additional options, and the like. But is there enough of a market for this high-
quality, high-cost item?
     Mass production is made possible by providing products that the masses can
afford. This calls for lowering the designed strength of material, cost of produc-
tion, and, therefore, the actual quality of the finished product. Top management
of the auto industry might state this as a quality standard:
    Let’s design a utility automobile that will last 100,000 miles. If we wanted higher
    quality, why not design it for 200,000 miles? Cost is “why.” How many people can
    afford this more costly automobile?

    Once the design criteria have been established, the product designers will
design every part with these goals in mind. They may state more clearly that 95
percent of the autos will last 100,000 miles or more. The average, therefore, would
be higher, but any cost spent to create any one part of better quality will be money
misspent. Manufacturing facilities designers strive to achieve the design criteria by
8   Chapter 1



     selecting equipment, designing workstations, and establishing work methods
     that produce quality parts and assemblies. Quality and cost are the two primary
    ­competitive fronts. Controlling one without the other will lead to failure. You
     must constantly balance cost and quality. In manufacturing facilities design and
     material handling, the planner must consider quality in every phase and do
    ­nothing to harm quality. Space must be provided for quality control facilities.
         3.   Promote the effective use of people, equipment, space, and energy. This is another
     way of saying “reduce costs,” or “eliminate muda.” People, equipment, space, and
     energy are a company’s resources. They are expensive and you want to use them
     effectively. Productivity is a measure of use and is the ratio of output over (divided
     by) input. To increase productivity, you need to increase output, reduce input, or
     a combination of the two. The location of services like restrooms, locker rooms,
     cafeterias, tool cribs, and any other service will affect employee productivity and,
     therefore, the employees’ utilization or effectiveness. It is said that you can run
     pipe and wire, but you cannot run people. Providing convenient locations for
    ­services will increase productivity.
         Equipment can be very expensive and the operating costs must be recovered
     by charging each part produced on that machine a portion of the cost. The more
     parts run on one machine, the lower is the unit cost that each part must carry. So
     to achieve the second supporting objective, namely, to reduce cost, you must strive
     to get as much out of each machine as possible. Calculate how many machines are
     required in the beginning for maximum machine use. Remember, machine loca-
     tion, material flow, material handling, and workstation design all affect equipment
     usage.
         Space is also costly, thus designers need to promote effective use of the space.
     Good workstation layout procedures will include everything required to operate
     that workstation, but no extra space. Normally, planners can do a good job of
     using floor space, but what about the other spaces?

            a. Under the floor (basements) is a good place for utility tunnels, walkways
               between buildings, under-the-floor conveyors for material delivery or
               trash removal, and tanks under the floor for storage. Use your imagina-
               tion and save expensive floor space.
            b. Overhead (from 7 feet to rafters) is usable space. This space can be used
               for overhead conveyors, pallet racks, mezzanines, shelves or bins for stor-
               age, balcony offices, pneumatic delivery systems, dryers, ovens, and so on.
               Again, use your imagination and save floor space.
            c. Ceiling space under the roof (in the rafters or trusses) is space that can
               be used for utilities, heating and cooling, sprinkler systems, catwalks, and
               some storage.
            d. On the roof, space can be used for parking, weather testing of a product,
               utility units, ovens, golf driving range, tennis court, and so on.

       As stated, designers want to promote the use of all the space in the plant. This
    concept is known as “utilizing the building cube.” The idea consists of utilizing the
    Introduction to Manufacturing Facilities Design and Material Handling               9


vertical dimensions as well as the horizontal dimensions of the facility. Keep in
mind that whereas land is purchased based on square units, space is obtained in
cubic units. Oftentimes management asks industrial engineering to help justify
more building space, and after the initial study, finds there is plenty of space if
they just go vertical. Floor space gets the most attention, but there is so much
more space available. Planners must use their imaginations and create space,
focusing first on using the present space more efficiently.
      Energy costs can be excessive: Million-dollar utility budgets are common. You
can promote energy efficiency by good facilities design techniques. Opening dock
doors allows heating and cooling energy to escape. Placing hot equipment where
energy can be contained could reduce energy requirements. A “silly” example
would be running the air conditioning while having a fire in the fireplace; how-
ever, this is what manufacturing facilities are doing all the time with hot opera-
tions. Isolating these operations and controlling heat can save big dollars. Another
example is that heat rises, thus dryers can be placed near the ceiling to reduce the
heat needed. Electricity, gas, water, steam, oil, and telephone must all be used effi-
ciently. The plant layout will greatly affect these costs.
      4.   Provide for the convenience, safety, and comfort of our employees. Although con-
venience has already been discussed, in addition to being a productivity factor,
it is also an employee relations concern. If you design plants with inconvenient
employee services, you are telling the employees every day that the company
does not care about them. Drinking fountains, parking lot design and location,
employee entrances, as well as restrooms and cafeterias must be convenient to all
employees.
      Employee safety is a moral and legal responsibility of the manufacturing facili-
ties designer. The weight of tools and products, the size of aisles, the design of
workstations, and housekeeping all affect the safety of the employees. Every deci-
sion made in manufacturing facilities design and material handling design must
include safety considerations and consequences. Material handling equipment
has reduced the physical demands of work and, therefore, has improved industrial
safety.
      But material handling equipment itself can be dangerous. The industrial
safety statistics indicate that 50 percent of all industrial accidents occur on ship-
ping and receiving docks while handling material. Designers must continue the
fight to reduce injury by every means possible.
      Good housekeeping means having a place for everything and having every-
thing in its place. The term “everything” is all-inclusive—tools, materials, supplies,
empty containers, scrap, waste, and so on. If the manufacturing facilities design
hasn’t considered any one of these items, a housekeeping problem will result and
this clutter is dangerous and costly.
      “Comfort” is a term that could communicate plush, costly surroundings, but in
workstation design and ergonomics, it refers to working at the correct work
height, having sufficient lighting, and standing or sitting alternately, and so on.
You don’t want to add fatigue to the operator. When operators are on a break, you
10   Chapter 1



     want to provide comfortable surroundings so that they can recuperate and return
     to work refreshed and, therefore, more productive.
          5.   Control project costs. The cost of the facility design and material handling
     project must be determined before presenting the plan to management for
     approval. What top management approves is the “spending” of money. Once the
     project is approved, the project manager is authorized to spend the budgeted
     monies. Going back for more money could be harmful for your career. Budgeting
     and then living within the budget are two things that successful managers and
     engineers learn to do early in their careers.
          6.   Achieve the production start date. Early in the life cycle of a new product, the
     production start date is set. The success of the project depends on whether the
     product gets to the market on time. Thus, the planner must meet these goals. If
     there is a late start, the employees may not be able to make up for the lost produc-
     tion. This is especially true for seasonable products. In fact, if you miss the season,
     you miss the whole year. Fast-moving consumer products companies, like toy
     companies, will set the production start date and schedule backward to establish
     a product schedule. Figure 1–1 shows such a schedule. Each important project
     milestone is identified and listed in the first column. Subsequent columns are used
     to track each product. The product number, product name, and the responsible
     project engineer in the column heading identify each product. For example, the
     third column is used to track product 1810, known by the product name Gizmo.
     The project engineer for this product is identified as Stephens. For each product,
     the scheduled completion date is listed across from each project step. For exam-
     ple, for product 1810, all time standards are to be set by April 5, shown as 4-5.
     Upon the completion of each step, an X is placed next to the scheduled comple-
     tion date.
          In this example, steps 10 and 11 are behind schedule for product number
     1670, known as Wizbang. Notice that the date of this report is March 11. Both
     steps 10 and 11 for product 1670 were to have been completed on March 10
     according to the scheduled completion date. The absence of the X by the sched-
     uled completion date indicates that these steps are behind schedule for this prod-
     uct. On the other hand, steps 5 and 6 are ahead of schedule for product 1810 as
     indicated by the presence of the X next to the scheduled completion dates. Note
     that for this product, the scheduled completion date for steps 5 and 6 is listed as
     April 1, hence ahead of schedule as compared with the current (report date) of
     March 11.
          Work schedules such as the one shown in Figure 1–1 are used to keep upper
     management informed. If anything is behind schedule, management will want to
     know what you are doing to catch up. If you need help, ask for it, but do not miss
     the production start date. It cannot be overstated that schedules must be met.
          7.   Build flexibility into the plan. It is certain that things will change, and
     ­designers need to anticipate where they are going to expand, select equipment
      that is versatile and movable, and design buildings that will be able to support
      a wide ­variety of uses.
                  Introduction to Manufacturing Facilities Design and Material Handling             11


Engineer _________________________________________              Date __3_/11/XX
                                                                         ___________________________
 1. Obtain product number                       1670                   1810         1900        1700
 2. Create product name                     Wizbang                  Gizmo
 3. Select project engineer                   Meyers              Stephens
 4. Determine production rate per shift      1,500                  1,750
 5. Complete manufacturing plan                 3-1 X                 4-1 X
 6. Complete material handling plan             3-1 X                 4-1 X
 7. Set time standards                          3-5 X                  4-5
 8. Determine number of                         3-6 X                  4-6
    a. fabrication machines needed              3-6 X                  4-6
    b. assembly stations needed                 3-6 X                  4-6
 9. Issue flow chart                          3-10 X                 4-10
10. Design workstations                       3-10                   4-10
11. Select material handling equipment        3-10                   4-10
12. Prepare budget plan                       3-12                   4-15
13. Prepare layout plan                       3-14                   4-15
14. Present to management                     3-15                   4-15
15. Write work orders to build stations       3-25                   4-15
16. Issue purchase orders                     3-15                   4-15
17. Develop quality control requirements        4-1                    5-1
18. Try out first workstations                  4-1                    5-1
19. Install equipment                         4-14                   5-14
20. Write work methods sheets                 4-14                   5-14
21. Run production pilot                      4-15                   5-15
22. Start production                            5-1                  5-30
23. Recheck everything
Note: X means this step is complete.

Figure 1–1   New product work progress report to be completed by one engineer.




                  8.   Reduce or eliminate excessive inventory. Inventory costs a company about 35
              percent a year to hold. These costs include

                        a. The cost of space and its supporting cost
                        b. The cost of money tied up in inventory
                        c. The cost for employees required to move and manage the inventory
                        d. The loss due to damage, obsolescence, and shrinkage
                        e. The cost for material handling equipment

                  All these costs add up to big money, so minimize all forms (raw material, work
              in process, finished goods) of inventory.
12   Chapter 1



         9.   Achieve miscellaneous goals. These include additional goals and objectives of
     the facilities and material handling plan. These should be added as you and the
     management decide something is important. For example, you may want to

             1. Restrict operator lifting to one part. This will require the designer to
                select material handling equipment that will eliminate the operator lift-
                ing boxes to a work area and off the station. This will also be a payback
                with lower back injury problems.
             2. Use work cells. This will reduce inventory and material handling.
             3. Use plug-in-plug-out equipment to allow operators to move equipment
                easily for flexibility.
             4. Minimize work in process because inventory is expensive.
             5. Build kanban (signal board or instruction card) or just-in-time inventory
                philosophy into the manufacturing facility design.
             6. Build visual management systems into the design to improve factory man-
                agement.
             7. Design for first-in-first-out inventory for inventory control.

         Whatever you think is important and want to accomplish by your new facility
     design should be stated as a goal. Goals are to strive for but not always to achieve
     perfectly. However, without goals designers have much less chance to achieve all
     they want to do. Two last thoughts about goals: They should be measurable and
     achievable.


n The Manufacturing Facilities Design Procedure
     The quality of a manufacturing facility design (the plant layout blueprint) depends
     on how well the planner collects and analyzes the basic data. The blueprint is the
     final step of the design process and the step during which novice planners want to
     start. This is like reading the last page of a book first. Resist jumping into the layout
     phase before collecting and analyzing the basic data. If you have faith and follow
     the procedure, a great design will, like magic, automatically appear. The following
     is a systematic way of thinking about a project:

      1. Determine what will be produced; for example, a toolbox or swing set or lawn
         mower.
      2. Determine how many will be made per unit of time; for example, 1,500 per
          8-hour shift.
      3. Determine what parts will be made or purchased complete—some companies
         buy out all parts, and they are called assembly plants. Those parts the company
         makes itself require fabrication equipment and considerably more design
         work.
      4. Determine how each part will be fabricated. This is called process planning
         and is usually done by a manufacturing engineer, but in many projects, the
   Introduction to Manufacturing Facilities Design and Material Handling          13


    manufacturing facilities designer is also responsible for tool, equipment, and
    workstation design.
 5. Determine the sequence of assembly. This is called assembly line balancing. The
    topic is covered in depth throughout this book.
 6. Set time standards for each operation. It is impossible to design a plant layout
    without time standards.
 7. Determine the plant rate (takt time). This is how fast the facility needs to pro-
    duce. For example, it needs to make 1,500 units in 8 hours (480 minutes), so
    480 minutes divided by 1,500 units equals .32 minute. The speed of the plant
    and every operation in the plant must make a part every .32 minute (about
    three parts per minute).
 8. Determine the number of machines needed. Once you know the plant rate
    and the time standard for each operation, divide the time standard by the line
    rate and the number of machines results. For example, you have an operation
    with a time standard of .75 minute and a line rate of .32 minute. How many
    machines are needed (.75 divided by .32 equals 2.34 machines)? You will need
    to purchase three machines. If you buy only two, you will never produce 1,500
    units per shift without working overtime. This will cause a bottleneck.
 9. Balance assembly lines or work cells. This is dividing work among assemblers
    or cell operators according to the line rate. Try to give everyone as close to the
    same amount of work as possible.
10. Study the material flow patterns to establish the best (shortest distance
    through the facility) flow possible.
    a. string diagram
    b. multiproduct process chart
    c. from-to chart
    d. process chart
    e. flow process chart
    f. flow diagram
11. Determine activity relationships—How close do departments need to be to
    each other to minimize people and material movement?
12. Lay out each workstation. These layouts will lead to department layouts, and
    then to a facilitywide layout.
13. Identify needs for personal and plant services, and provide the space needed.
14. Identify office needs and layout as necessary.
15. Develop total space requirements from the above information.
16. Select material handling equipment.
17. Allocate the area according to the space needed and the activity relationships
    established in item 11 above.
18. Develop a plot plan and the building shape. How will the facility fit on the
    property?
19. Construct a master plan. This is the manufacturing facility design—the last
    page of the project and the result of all the data collected and the decisions
    made over the past months.
14   Chapter 1



     20. Seek input and adjust. Ask your peer-level engineers and managers to review
         your plan to see if they can punch holes in your design before you present it
         to management for approval.
     21. Seek approvals, take advice, and change as needed.
     22. Install the layout. At this stage, the plan comes together and is one of the most
         rewarding times, as well as one of the most stressful.
     23. Start production. Anticipate that many things will go wrong. No one has
         started up any production line without some problems; don’t expect you will
         be the first. You will get better each time, but it will never be perfect.
     24. Adjust as needed and finalize project report and budget performance.

          Many engineering professors and industrial consulting firms are trying to
     develop a computer formula for manufacturing facilities design. So far, they have
     developed computer algorithms and simulations for parts of the analysis. Facilities
     planners will use these tools like any other tool, but the quality of the design will
     depend on how well they analyze the data, not the computer’s ability to solve prob-
     lems. Therefore, it is best to take a systematic approach, one step at a time, and to
     add information at each step. When completed this way, the results appear like
     magic (a great plant layout result). A mature layout technician knows that a good
     layout is inevitable if the procedure is followed.
          The manufacturing facilities design procedure is a general plan of the project.
     Each step will include some techniques that will not be used in every situation.
     Skipping steps is permissible if considered and determined not to be necessary. The
     24-step procedure just presented is the basic outline for the remainder of the book.
     If you are doing a layout project, you might use this list as an outline.



n Types and Sources of Manufacturing Facilities
  Design Projects
      1. New facility.   This is by far the most fun and where the most influence can be
         made with a new manufacturing facility project. There are fewer restrictions
         and constraints placed on a new project because you do not have to be con-
         cerned about old facilities.
      2. New product.  The company sets aside a corner of the plant for a new product.
         The new product must be incorporated into the flow of the rest of the plant,
         and some common equipment may be shared with old products.
      3. Design changes.   Product design changes are always being made to improve the
         cost and quality of the product. The layout may be affected by these changes,
         and the facility designer should review every design change.
      4. Cost reduction.   The plant facility designer may find a better layout that will
         produce more products with less worker effort. Others within the company
         may make suggestions for improvements and cost reductions that will affect
         the layout. All must be considered.
        Introduction to Manufacturing Facilities Design and Material Handling             15


      5. Retrofit.  Because many old plants are poorly laid out, older manufacturing
         facilities designers may spend most of their time working on making these
         facilities more productive. The procedure for retrofit is the same as for a
         new plant—except there are more constraints. These constraints include:
         existing walls, floor pits, low ceilings, and any other permanent fixtures that
         may pose an obstacle to an efficient material flow.
     Every area of human activity has material or people flows. Disney World’s flow is
     people; hospitals have flows of patients, medical supplies, and food service; stores
     have flows of customers and merchandise; kitchens have flows of cooks and foods.
     If designers study the flow, they can improve it by changing the facilities layout.
     Opportunities are everywhere.
          Although it is said that only death and taxes are certain, there exists a third
     ­certainty—a plant layout will change. Some industries are more changeable than
      others. For example, a toy company may have new products added to its product
     line every month. Plant layout work would be continuous in such a company. In
      a paper mill, the layout would change very little from year to year, so plant layout
      work would be minimal.


n Computers and Simulation in Manufacturing
  Facilities Design
     Computer simulation and modeling are rapidly becoming important in the manufac-
     turing and service segment of American industry. As a result of market dynamics and
     fierce global competition, manufacturing and service enterprises are forced to provide
     a better quality product or service on a more cost-effective basis while trying to reduce
     the production or service lead time. The quest for the competitive edge requires con-
     tinuous improvement and changes in the processes and implementation of new tech-
     nologies. Unfortunately, even the most carefully planned, highly automated, sophis-
     ticated manufacturing systems are not always immune from costly design blunders
     or unanticipated failures. Among the common examples of these costly mistakes are
     insufficient space to hold in-process inventory, mismatches in machine capacities, inef-
     ficient material flow, and congested paths for automatic guided vehicles (AGVs).
          Although computer simulation and modeling are not new to solving compli-
     cated mathematical problems or to providing insights into sophisticated statistical
     distributions, the power of the new generation software has dramatically increased
     the application of computer modeling as a problem-solving tool in the facilities
     design arena. Simulation packages currently available no longer require a strong
     background in mathematics or computer programming languages in order to per-
     form real-world simulations. There are a number of user-friendly advanced sim­
     ulation packages available that allow the user to simulate either the working of a
     factory, a just-in-time inventory environment, a warehousing and logistics problem,
     or the behavior of a group technology system. These simulation packages have
     been demonstrated to be a valuable aid in the decision-making processes. They also
16   Chapter 1



     require a relatively small investment of time on the part of the novice in order to
     develop a working knowledge of the simulation process.
          Simulation can be used to predict the behavior of a manufacturing or service
     system by actually tracking the movements and interaction of the system compo-
     nents and aiding in optimizing such systems. The simulation software generates
     reports and detailed statistics describing the behavior of the system under study.
     Based on these reports, the physical layouts, equipment selection, operating proce-
     dures, resource allocation and utilization, inventory policies, and other important
     system characteristics can be evaluated.
          Simulation modeling is dynamic, in that the behavior of the model is tracked
     over time. Second, simulation is a stochastic process, meaning random occurrences
     can be studied.
          In the scope of facilities planning and design, computer simulation can be uti-
     lized to study and optimize the layout and capacity, JIT inventory policies, mate-
     rial handling systems, and warehousing and logistics planning. Computer simula-
     tion allows the comparison of different alternatives and studies various scenarios in
     order to select the most suitable setup.
          Currently, there are a number of user-friendly advanced simulation packages
     available to assist the facility planners in achieving the best possible results. Computer
     simulation and its application are discussed in greater detail in Chapter 15.


     ISO 9000 and Facilities Planning
     ISO 9000 and other quality standards have become a major contributing factor in
     the operations of many manufacturing and service enterprises. The ISO series of
     international standards were first published in 1987 by the International Organ­
     ization for Standardization (ISO). All or part of these standards can be adopted
     by an organization depending on the size and the scope of the operation of the
     enterprise. A large number of corporations demand that their vendors be regis-
     tered under this or other similar quality standards. Indeed, such registration is now
     a primary prerequisite for many vendors. ISO 9000 standards and requirements can
     have a direct influence on facilities design. Considerations must be given during
     the initial planning of the facilities in order to incorporate and facilitate the imple-
     mentation of these standards. The latest revision of the ISO 9000 standard empha-
     sizes the “process approach” to the organization of the enterprise. When analyzing
     the facilities planning from a macroscale approach, each and every aspect of the
     enterprise—from receiving to shipping, with all the intermediate and support func-
     tions of the facility—should function as an integrated and a cohesive system sup-
     porting the process. Some of the specifics are as follows.
          A facility layout is only as effective as the management team and the plan that
     the team follows to run the company. An effective quality management system rein-
     forces and complements the physical aspects of the facilities and aims to maximize
     the return on the investments in the organization’s physical assets such as produc-
     tion equipment. The company must develop, document, implement, and main-
     tain an effective quality management system. This system needs to outline critical
   Introduction to Manufacturing Facilities Design and Material Handling           17


 processes and records that are to be maintained. The documented quality sys-
 tem needs to be controlled to ensure that the company is operating on current
standards and correct procedures. The company must have upper management’s
c­ ommitment to producing a quality product. Personnel’s responsibilities must be
outlined and understood at all levels. Top management must ensure that customer
requirements are determined and met to promote customer satisfaction.
     Management must regularly review the company’s quality management system
to ensure that the current practices indeed adhere to the stated policies and that the
current standards are adequate for the company’s capabilities. This includes capa-
bility analyses of equipment, personnel, and space resources of the organization.
Management must continually monitor operations for improvement opportunities.
     In addition, the company must ensure that it has adequate resources. These
resources are, but are not limited to, qualified personnel, proper equipment, and
sufficient levels of inventory. The company must determine and provide adequate
resources needed to implement and maintain the quality management system
and enhance customer satisfaction. The work environment needs to be suitable to
achieve conformity to product and customer requirements. The responsibility and
role of the facility planner in determining the required level of these resources is of
paramount importance.
     A company must have a well-defined and a structured system for manag-
ing its inventory in order to ensure that parts are being completed on schedule
and within customer specifications. The organization must have a written and
w
­ ell-documented plan on how products and components will be traced from receipt,
through all stages of processing, and finally, delivery. When batch or product trace-
ability is required, data collection capabilities can be built into material handling
equipment and also incorporated as part of the workstation design. Handheld or
stationary scanners, for the purposes of data collection and item tracking, should
be designed as part of the workstation design and facilities planning.
     The company must plan and develop the processes needed for product realiza-
tion. Customer requirements need to be considered and specific processes must be
determined to achieve customer satisfaction. These customer requirements must
be reviewed and approved prior to acceptance to ensure that the equipment and
process capabilities that are required to meet these requirements do exist.
     The design and development process must be considered as well. Beginning
 with customers’ specifications to the outputs from the facility, all procedures and
 processes must tie back to achieving customer satisfaction. The company is required
to ensure that production of the product is maintained under controlled condi-
tions. This requirement can be tied directly to JIT, MRP, kanban, or other produc-
tion control systems. In addition, consideration must be given by the planners in
the initial stages of facilities design as to how to incorporate procedures for quality
assurance or verification at receiving, work in process (WIP), and finally, during the
final stage of production.
     There are specific processes that need to be measured and analyzed to adhere
to customer requirements. An example would be testing the hardness of steel to
ensure it conforms to stated customer requirements. Those processes need to be
