       INGB417 Facilities Design 2026 - A Practical Facilities Design Group assignment


Assignment 3 (Report (only Design specifications)) [no mark, only feedback] Due
Monday 23 March 2026 (this serves as the input to Design alternatives, if there is no
hand in of this report, there will be no marking of Assessment 4)

Assignment 4 (full Report and Interviews) [/100] Report due on Monday 4 May 2026 with
Interviews on Tuesday 5 May 2026 (bring MFP A3 size minimum, A2 preferred)

This is a Group assignment. (Group size = 3) Members are assigned by the lecturer. When
handing in the documents, please note the members’ names and student numbers and everyone’s
individual contribution in a table on the cover page. The reason for a group is to provide an
opportunity to learn from each other, so please don’t let any individual do things completely alone
without sharing what was done. This project is preparation for the GA exam. The process you
follow here is what will be expected in the exam.

Work must be typed. All calculations, graphs, tables, or charts must be shown to indicate insight
into how the facility was designed. Provide evidence for thoughts you had, assumptions you
made, the logic you used in getting to the design. The report and interview are your evidence.

This is a DESIGN project. The expectation is that you develop the ECSA Graduate Attribute
(GA) skills specifically related to Engineering Design as applied to a Facilities Design problem.
Remember that you will have to prove by the way you communicate what was done, how it was
done, etc. Evaluation will only be done on the written Reports and the verbal Interviews. Use
words wisely. ‘Sell yourselves well’ For more information on how to approach this
project/assignment study these 3 documents uploaded onto eFundi, as you need them:

   1. INGB417 aligning GA3 with FD steps Feb2026.pdf
   2. INGB417 Clarifying Objs and Reqs Feb2025pdf
   3. INGB417 Design Report guidance Feb2026.pdf

This group project counts 60% towards your module mark.

PURPOSE:

   •   To develop the skills applicable to understand a design problem, including research skills
       needed in analyzing the production process design and how to calculate design
       requirements (eg. number of machines per process step).
   •   From these requirements proposing and evaluating alternative solutions and presenting a
       final detailed design that solves the facility design problem, with appropriate justification.
   •   To develop problem solving and creative thinking skills
   •   To develop the ability and confidence to work with people in groups to gather appropriate
       and relevant data
   •   To develop communication skills in report writing and doing an interview.

THE ASSIGNMENT:

As an Industrial Engineer you have been appointed to act as the Facility Design team leader for
the new facility required by Hypnos Mattress Manufacturers for their new facility making
mattresses. Your task is to DESIGN a NEW MANUFACTURING FACILITY. by the end of
April 2026, to present to Hypnos management on 5 May 2026.
           INGB417 Facilities Design 2026 - A Practical Facilities Design Group assignment

   Refer to Appendix 1 for the company brief you will be designing the facility for. Specifications
   and requirements are mentioned. If other information is needed, you are welcome to make your
   own assumptions based on research. Remember to indicate all in your report.

   Refer to Appendix 2 for the group members per group number. You can choose your own roles
   and responsibilities and who is to upload the deliverables. Only one upload per group is required.

   Refer to Appendix 3 for guidance on the type of data that you will have to get, calculate, or
   assume to design a facility.

   DELIVERABLES:

   For Assignment 3 (no mark, only detail feedback) = The first half of your report (Design
   requirements) must be uploaded to eFundi by Monday 23 March 2026 @ 8h00. The
   expectation is that you will then have a clear understanding of what is supposed to be happening
   at the new facility and have shown enough data and analysis to start with facility layouts. This
   must include workstations levels showing detail dimensions as these are used to work out areas
   for the next steps. Feedback will be given on account of design requirements calculations.

   Groups are then required to integrate findings from data analysis to design layouts. Groups should
   present at least 3 alternative block layouts (showing calculated areas) with an appropriate
   evaluation process for selecting the most suitable alternative. A justification should be presented
   for all decisions including relevant analysis where applicable to present the chosen Final Master
   Facility Plan. The MFP must include scale, legend and dimensions of the plot, buildings and
   outer areas.

   For Assignment 4 (mark /100) A final report (Chapters 1-10) must be uploaded to eFundi on
   Monday 4 May 2026 @ 8h00. [only one upload report per group] The report should include the
   following: A cover page (reflecting the facility challenge), an Abstract (as for executive
   management), the Table of Contents, Lists of Figures/tables, and then the report as per the
   chapters indicated in the guidelines. The MFP printed on A3 (minimum), preferably A2 MUST
   be brought to the Interview (one per group).

   • A 15 minute Interview will be done with each group on Tuesday 5 May 2026. A timetable will
   be set for these interviews.

   ASSESSMENT of FINAL REPORT together with Interview:

   Marks will be given on the following ECSA GA criteria like the exam. See Rubric to be used
   below.

[TIP: This is a BIG and interesting Assignment. Make sure that you start early enough to get a feeling
for the scope so there is enough time for later design details. Do NOT underestimate the time it takes]
        INGB417 Facilities Design 2026 - A Practical Facilities Design Group assignment

GROUP NUMBER: ____________

 Perform creative, procedural and non-procedural design and synthesis of components, systems, engineering works,
 products or processes.
                                                  EVALUATION CRITERIA

                                                                     Weighting      Mark          Mark       Mark
                                                                                 (Interview)    (Report)    (Final)
 Clear interpretation of the design problem and                        /30
 formulation/calculation of design requirements or
 specifications. (includes appropriate use of analytical tools and
 techniques.)



 Practical insight shown during the design process and in the          /20
 design solution



 Sufficient detail provided in the solution to meet the design         /30
 requirements (Receiving & Dispatch, Processes, Storage,
 Offices, Support functions all in MFP)



 Effective use of a structured and rigorous design process             /10
 (Report structure corresponding to process steps



 Effective communication of the design process and solution            /10



 FINAL MARK (Interview 50: Report 50)                                  /100      Interview     Report      Total
                                                                                 mark          total       mark




Other comments:
