 Servicescape layout



2026
W Kruger
Service processes Layout – as opposed to Production

• Goal is to maximize net profit per square foot of floor space.
• Servicescape criteria

   1. Ambient conditions
      • Background characteristics, such as noise, lights, atmosphere
   2. Spatial layout and functionality
      • circulation path of customers and grouping merchandise
   3. Signs, symbols, and artifacts
      • Parts of the service that have social significance
Alternative Store Layouts




     Can you think of some local places where same type
     of business have different layouts?
     What works? And what does not? Why?
Some Marketing Research pointers

1. People in supermarkets tend to follow a perimeter pattern in their
   shopping behavior.
2. Sale merchandise placed at the end of an aisle in supermarkets
   almost always sells better.
3. Non-selling departments should be placed either on upper floors or
   in “dead” areas.
4. Locations nearest the store entrances and adjacent to front window
   displays are most valuable.
Other requirements include:

1. Minimize unnecessary personnel movement within the area.
2. Facilitate communication (especially with customers)
3. Provide privacy where necessary.
4. Conform to building codes.
5. Provide safety and security for people in the building.
6. When thinking about Customer ‘interaction’ (aim to improve
   ‘participation’ and minimize unnecessary ‘waiting’)
7. Note that there are always ‘Service processes’ supporting any
   production or manufacturing facility as well.
Office Layout

• Trend is toward more OPEN and Flexibility = requirement
• Openness by no/low divider walls, improved visibility
• Spaces for team communication and teamwork
• Sometimes the size and orientation of desks indicates importance of
  people behind them.
• Offices convey IMAGE of the company

• Let us have a look at some SMART modern offices …
Video Smart Office Concept – YouTube (2min)
6 companies lead the way to Smart office including: SAMSUNG, LINKEDIN, ADOBE, MARRIOTT,
CISCO (at 27min) and AMAZON (40min) https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Tg5_DjW6_p0
Inquisitive about some more ‘cool’ facilities? look at The Genius Design
of Apple Park (18min) here: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VbeM8Lf7s5A
