                    INGB417 FACILITIES DESIGN – DESIGN REPORT GUIDANCE

Although writing a report is a skill you will learn in many other modules, this document will
attempt to provide you with the expected structure for a Facilities Design report.

                        “Words(and pictures) sell, or they don’t”
A report is often the only thing you will have to present and sell your idea to either customer,
colleague, or boss.

A Report is READ!!! So you must write so that your thinking logic is read, not assumed.

General tips:
Plan your report with a pen on some paper ﬁrst, by ﬁguring out what your Table of Contents (ToC)
must/can be. The ToC must be logically structured – like telling a story, so ensure coherence.

While planning the ToC, separate and list and number different sections, Tables and Figures.

It will help if somebody completely objective reads the report and give feedback. If they cannot
understand it, then neither will the examiner.


The structure:
Apart from the Cover page (with all relevant detail) and Appendices (declutter the report from
too much detail)

1.      Executive Summary
Must be concise yet comprehensive. No longer than one page in length. Brief overview of the
current state (or Needs analysis), key design requirements, chosen design and motivation as
well as implementation estimates.

2.      Background
Provide context for your project. Distinguish between a new facility design or a current facility
redesign, as this will inﬂuence your constraints.

3.      Design Objectives
Explain and list current needs or problems with the current facility. Your main objective of the
project will typically be: ‘To design a xxx(type) facility that (specify what it will be able to do xxx)’
Deﬁne the objectives (what is it that you are aiming to achieve) of the facility.

4.      Design Requirement statements
This is the speciﬁcs that can be measured for success. These have to do with capacity, process
activities, storage policies and space requirements. The better you can quantify the
statements at this point the better you will be able to evaluate options to choose the best one
and measure the design success at the end.
Make sure that you describe how you would know if your facility layout was good. If a facility
does not meet these design requirements, then it is not a good facility.
                  INGB417 FACILITIES DESIGN – DESIGN REPORT GUIDANCE


5.     Assumptions and constraints
Explain assumptions you made or were given (if appropriate) as well as the constraints you are
limited by. These can be space, budget or time limits. Also specify environmental, health,
procedural, regulatory speciﬁcations etc. the facility needs to adhere to.

6.     Detail design speciﬁcations
Give an overview of all the DATA that you researched, calculated, asked for or assumed. If you
are redesigning a facility, specifying the current state is recommended to show improvement.
You must collect data on everything as it inﬂuences decisions. Sales volumes, demand,
production capacity, process detail activities (this is where you need to show the Production
process ﬂow charts), interrelationships amongst activities, where is raw materials received and
ﬁnal products dispatched, how does material ﬂow through the process, include storage areas
speciﬁcs and policies, transport processes, specify equipment, labor etc. Also include all
supporting processes eg. Power, water, offices, personnel, light, parking, amenities etc. See
GETTING DATA GUIDANCE document also.
This is the heading where a lot of calculations are done, but you only place summaries here. It
is under this heading that you need to be strategic about what you include in your report and
what you place in an appendix. Tables work well especially if it shows calculations logic well.
Show DETAIL workstation designs as evidence that you understand the practical implications
on that level of detail. These can then be used to support the bigger space requirements
calculations especially for work AREAS or departments.
The goal of showing data and calculations is to provide a logical traceable argument for the
decisions that you took when designing your facility. Your data must therefore be strategic to
convince your reader that the thinking and analysis behind your ﬁnal design is solid, rigorous,
and trustworthy since it is based on researched data.

7.     Design Alternatives
Give an overview of the alternatives that you considered and how you evaluated them. Include
at least 3 alternatives on some aspect of your design.
Block layouts (indicate areas in blocks to check your dimensions relations) are very useful at
this stage as you do not need a high degree of detail. Also indicate how you developed
alternatives, based on what logic, criteria or method or approach (if possible). Basically – try
and lead the reader through your thinking process. Be creative and make use of
brainstorming techniques to develop original ideas.

8.     Evaluating alternatives
Make use of some technique in doing an evaluation, so that it shows a systematic approach,
not just liking some ideas better than others. Refer to the Objectives and Requirements to
measure effectiveness of the design alternatives.

9.     The ﬁnal design
Present a Master Facility layout (a full conceptual layout plan of whole plot). This must logically
ﬂow from the Block layout chosen. Indicate scale (as line) and dimensions for the big areas such
as Plot, buildings and outside parking. Use arrows to show material ﬂow. Highlight blocks or
areas using colours / shapes etc. You do not need fancy software but you do need to be creative.
                  INGB417 FACILITIES DESIGN – DESIGN REPORT GUIDANCE


10. Business case
In the business case for implementation the following should be included at least:

Capital cost estimates of buildings (based on cost/sq m) and equipment (as calculated). No
need to include stocking the warehouses, Procurement functions will take care of that.
Operational costs do not need to be included as a Facility Design project is usually a Capex
project handed over to Operations when ﬁnished. The business case heading must also
include Risks associated with implementation (and mitigation strategies) and a high level
Schedule.




Below some tips on FORMATTING of your report

Formatting has a signiﬁcant impact on the overall professionalism of your report.

      Use a standard referencing method.
      Please spell and grammar check your work. Don’t rely on your own eye to pick up the
       mistakes – use the functionality in your Word processor or make use of the free version
       of Grammarly / Writefull.
      11 size font works well
      1.5 line spacing works well
      Calibri, Arial, Times New Roman are some of the more traditional fonts
      Full justify your text – more professional
      Make strategic use of headings and sub-headings. Not too many and not too little.
      Avoid going more than 3 levels deep in sub-headings. If you are, restructure all your
       headings.
      Number Headings and sub-headings and check that it is correct when inserting the ToC
      Very often students make unnecessary use of Smart Art type graphics. Technical
       reports rarely have big, bold, colourful, blocked graphics like this.
      DO make use of bulleted lists, tables and ﬁgures where ever possible but construct
       them neatly.
      It is a good idea to always portray your ideas using ﬁgures and tables to make it easier
       for the reader to follow.
      Figures and/or tables can really work well to summarize similar data and calculations
       but refer to them in the text. Remember that a report is read, so help to draw the reader’s
       attention to important details.
