INGB417 FACILITIES DESIGN

GA3 EXAM 2025


Tipe Assessering/ Type of Assessment:    GA Assignment
Kwalifikasie/ Qualification:             B Eng (Industrial)
Modulekode/ Module code:                 INGB417           Tydsduur/ Duration:    6-13 June 2025

Module beskrywing/ Module description: Facilities Design           Maks/ Max:              100
Eksaminator(e)/ Examiner(s):             Willemien Kruger (BEng Industrial, M Eng)
Internal Moderator:                      Marius Alberts (BEng Industrial)
External Examiner:                       Prof Chris van Schoor (PhD Industrial Eng)


Instructions:
Read the DESIGN BRIEF as given below, then do appropriate and relevant research to develop your
FACILITY DESIGN. This is to be presented in a Facility Design Report (like the Group Assignment report),
including all relevant chapters to demonstrate your understanding of the Engineering Design process. An
in-person Debrief session will be held on Friday 6 June 13h00-14h00 (in IE boardroom) to clarify
expectations and answer any questions you may have.


Your FACILITY DESIGN Report must be uploaded (pdf), to eFundi on Friday 13 June 2025 by 8h00.
You do not have to submit a printed report.
  The body of the report should be no longer than 40 pages. Appendices may be included and will not count
 towards the 40 pages. Appendices will only be considered if they are appropriately referred to in the body of
        the report. No additional files, drawings or spreadsheets will be considered by the examiners.
 Remember that more words do not necessarily reflect better insight and since this subject is about a Layout
         plan and the supporting key assumptions and calculations, focus on getting that right.


No changes to the report will be accepted once it is uploaded to eFundi. No late or resubmissions will be
accepted.


Exit interviews will be done with an examiner panel on Wednesday 18 June (9h00-16h00) as well as
Thursday 19 June 2025 (9h00-13h00). The detail schedule and venue have been communicated in the
week of 20 May 2025 for individual planning purposes. Please bring only a colour PRINTED A2 (or larger
if you wish) of the MASTER FACILITY PLAN to the interview to be part of the discussion.


The main purpose of this assignment is to assess your ability to make use of a systematic engineering
design approach as the Graduate Attribute (GA) 3 to graduate as an Industrial Engineer. You must obtain at
least 50% for the exam report as well as passing GA3. Failure to demonstrate competence in this GA will
result in failure of this assessment and the module.
Students are expected to complete the assignment independently, and a declaration will be required when
uploading the final report. Any ideas, conversations or content used in the design process must be credited
and referenced. The final design must be an original piece of work that the student is solely responsible
for developing and presenting.




                                                                                                              1
INGB417 FACILITIES DESIGN

GA3 EXAM 2025


DESIGN BRIEF:          TIPTOP TABLE MANUFACURING

Background – TIPTOP TABLES is a manufacturer of outdoor tables and chairs supplying the local
South African market for the past 25 years. Current sales for specifically the outdoor set including
one lightweight 2in1 aluminium outdoor table with four chairs (to make up a complete set of one
table and 4 chairs) have picked up such that a need for a new facility for this product series alone
has been identified. This table also has a unique feature in that it can be a small or large table
depending on the configuration. Sales forecasts for up to 5 000 per month of these outdoor sets
is expected, which cannot be met within their current facilities as this is not the only product made.
Management has asked for the plans for a new facility which will help them make strategic
decisions on where to build it. You can assume that access to the facility from public roads will
be a requirement. The facility must leave about 20% space available for future expansion needs.


TIPTOP requires you, as Industrial Engineer, to apply a systematic engineering design approach
to develop a comprehensive FACILITIES LAYOUT for the new manufacturing facility. Apart from
providing space for the main production processes of manufacturing the tables, the facility needs
to accept delivery vehicles/trucks from suppliers bringing raw materials to offload, it needs to
store all materials inside the facility, as well as provide a place for customers collecting orders, or
their own trucks loading orders for delivery to customers.


THE PRODUCT – OUTDOOR SET OF ALUMUNIUM 3in1 TABLE and 4 CHAIRS




These pictures indicate the look and
dimensions of the table to be made.

This patio dining table is made of naturally
water-safe aluminium alloy with an extra protective powder coat for the charcoal grey colour.
Aluminium makes it light to move when needed and even faster at expanding. A slatted surface
makes the extendable outdoor dining table easy to wipe dry after rain. It is packaged as partly
assembled, as the 4 legs can be assembled at home.


                                                                                                          2
INGB417 FACILITIES DESIGN

GA3 EXAM 2025


Part of the set include 4 chairs also made from aluminium alloy with the
seat and backing made from weaved rattan. The dimensions are not
given, as you only need to know that a standard aluminium pipe tube of
6m length is used for the frame. The rattan seat/backing is outsourced
to another company which take away the frames for their work daily
and bring back completed chairs daily.



PRODUCT AND MANUFACTURING INFORMATION

The easiest way to understand the manufacturing process is to watch the current process where a
variety of outdoor furniture is made: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=b3m4THLU2Iw
The manufacturing of the chairs can be viewed here:
https://www.youtube.com/shorts/Je6bNHXVILQ
[please note that the video is for background and information purposes only]
In the new facility they will be doing things similarly, but they may need to purchase more machines
and get more labour to fulfil demand. You are required to help management with these calculations
on work and capacity demand. The only raw materials bought are aluminium tubes from
https://www.aluminiumtrading.co.za/
Rectangular tubes (40mmx20mmx1,2mm) are bought to make the frame for the tabletop as well as
the inserted structure that allows the two tabletops to slide together for the small configuration.
Flat bars (101,6mmx9,52mm) are bought for the tabletop (this is welded to a frame).
Square tubes (60mmx60mm) are bought to make the table legs.
Round tubes (25,4mmx1,6mm) are bought for making the chairs.


The main processes to focus on are specified as follows:
 For the TABLE manufacturing:                        Estimated processing times
 CUTTING of the standard 6m rectangular tube 1min for all parts cut per table
 for making the table frame (this is done by a
 CNC laser cutting machine)
 WELDING (automated robot) to make the 5min per sliding structure
 structure for enabling 2 tabletops to slide into
 each other
 WELDING (manual) of the tabletop frame to the 10min per one tabletop frame
 flat bars to make the tabletops (2 tops are
 needed to make 1 table)
 GRINDING and POLISHING is done by hand to 1min per tabletop
 just ensure smooth finishes
                                                                                                      3
INGB417 FACILITIES DESIGN

GA3 EXAM 2025


 POWDER COATING only with machine in a 30sec per structure
 chamber specially design for this activity
 ASSEMBLY by hand to put two tabletops 5min per table
 together with the sliding structure to make the
 3in1 table. 20 screws are used per table for this
 activity.
 Just before packing the legs, rubber levelling 1min per 4 legs
 feet are put on which are bought from outside.
 PACKAGING by hand to ensure quality check 5min per set.
 and correct orders are packed. Packaging is Small orders can be collected – less than 5 sets
 done to a maximum of 5 tables together with the Large orders are delivered to customers – more
 legs, in one carton box.                            than 5 sets.


The specifications of the table frame are as follows:




 Tabletop:                                           Inserted structure for sliding:
 Viewed from beneath, fifteen flat bars are laid Three pieces of 1m in length are welded
 out next to each other and then welded to three together with two pieces of 0,94m.
 pieces of 1,52m in length as well as two pieces
 of 1m in length. Legs are put into the circular
 holds at the corners.


 For the CHAIRS manufacturing:                                           Processing time estimates
 CUTTING of the round tube for the frame. A standard 6m tube will 1min per tube
 be cut into 5 pieces for the chair frame by a CNC cutting machine.
 BENDING of the tubes to make the frame parts                            3min per chair
 WELDING (manual) of the tubing to make the frame                        5 min per chair


                                                                                                     4
INGB417 FACILITIES DESIGN

GA3 EXAM 2025


 Putting on the Rattan is outsourced.                                                                    The supplier delivers 1000
                                                                                                         chairs per day, which is
                                                                                                         sufficient               for         meeting
                                                                                                         demand.
 STACKING of chairs to await combining it with the tabletop to make 10min to stack 20 chairs
 a complete set as a finished product. Chairs are not packaged but
 just stacked together with tiestraps as associated with the packed
 tables in sets of 5 for large orders.
You should design enough space for any work-in-progress needed between processes. Also
remember to make provision for scrap that may be made at the CUTTING stations.


Some specific requirements management needs are to have a separate space assigned to any
welding work done, and allow safety space where the industrial robots are working. If any other
details are needed to determine space requirements, you can make assumptions. Process flow
charts must form part of their Quality Management System. You may use other tools and techniques
for better application to design a Facility Layout.


Some limitations have been set by shopfloor workers upon workstations arrangement as follows
due to movement safety as well as ventilation issues. These specifications must be considered
when determining the layout. It may also be useful to complete the chart to help in planning the
layout. The below activity relationship chart is applicable to tables.
                                       1




 1   Raw materials                                                                                                                             No. of
                                                                                                                    Value     CLOSENESS
                                           2




                                       A                                                                                                      Ratings

                                                                                                                             Absolutely
                                               3




 2   Cutting process                                                                                                 A         Necessary        5
                                                   4




                                       A       X
                                                                                                                             Especially
                                                                                                                     E
                                                       5




                                           X                                                                                   Important
 3   WIP of cut parts
                                                           6




                                       X                                                                                I    Important
                                                               7




 4   Automated robot welding                                                                                                 Ordinary
                                                                                                                     O
                                                                   8




                                       A                                                  "Closeness"                         Closeness OK
                                                                                             Rating
                                                                       9




 5   Manual welding of tabletop                                                                                      U       Unimportant
                                                                           10




                                               X
                                                                                                                     X        Not desirable     7
                                                                                11




                                                   X
 6   WIP of structures and tabletops
                                                                                     12




                                       A               X
                                                                                          13




                                                           X
 7   Powder coating/spraying
                                                                                               14
                                                                                                    15




 8   Assembly (tables and chairs)
                                                                                                         16
                                                                                                              17




 9   Packaging (xx m2)
                                                                                                                   18




                                       A
                                                                                                                        19




 10 Finished goods (xx m2)
                                                                                                                             20




                                                                                                                                                        5
INGB417 FACILITIES DESIGN

GA3 EXAM 2025


Other policies to consider include:

Manufacturing Operating Times
The company currently operates a 9 hour shift per day, 5 days per week. Operators are given 30
minutes for lunch and two 15 minute tea breaks per day. You can assume an average of 20
working days per month. Overtime or a Saturday shift is possible but should only be considered
to provide flexibility in capacity.

Inventory Levels
Inventory level policies are as follows:
Raw materials and components: 2 weeks stock        Finished goods: 1 month/4 weeks stock as
they are shipping overseas and need to ship big batches at a time.
Your own assumptions can be made regarding Work-In-Process (WIP) inventory at different
stages of production and the space needed on the shop floor.

Deliveries and Collections
Raw material and component deliveries take place throughout the week. Finished good
collections take place daily, or when taking bulk orders TIPTOP use their own fleet. All deliveries
and collections will take place during production hours.


FACILITY DESIGN EXPECTATIONS
The following provides detail expected to see in the Final Design.
• Materials Receiving and Storage Design considerations
    •      Clear receiving space for all suppliers,
    •      storage of all raw materials and components including details of 3D space requirements
           based on calculations, material flow and layout and material handling equipment
           recommendations.
    •      Staging of materials and components at manufacturing and assembly.
•       Manufacturing Operations Design
    •      Process flow charts to indicate clear understanding of the manufacturing processes
           required, including insight into bottlenecks, workstations and departments.
    •      Production capacity analysis (including detail calculations) compared to forecast demand
           to improve on process design so that the manufacturing processes can meet demand.
           Some changes will have to be made to meet future demand.
    •      Capacity analysis for all manufacturing processes including machine and personnel
           requirements organized in workstations.
    •      Recommended machinery for all critical manufacturing processes.
    •      Operator and material movement requirements including movement between
           manufacturing processes and movement of material from raw material storage to the WIP
           in manufacturing areas and then to finished goods storage. This can be summarised as
           flow and should be indicated on the final layout.
    •      Detailed layout and space planning for all workstations and WIP stations where required.
    •      Interface design for dispatch and receiving of chairs for external rattan seat/backing.
•       Finished Product Storage and Shipping Operations Design
    •      Finished product and order storage capacity including details of 3D space requirements
           based on calculations, flow and layout and equipment and materials handling
           recommendations.
                                                                                                      6
INGB417 FACILITIES DESIGN

GA3 EXAM 2025


     •       Clear and logical dispatch operation space for customers getting their small orders or
     •       Shipping operations where the company has their own trucks taking large orders to
             distribution centres.
•        Supporting Facilities & Services Design
         •   Personnel facilities for all employees on site.
         •   Offices and related facilities for: Management (1 senior and 2 middle management),
             administrative (5 people including Purchasing and Finance and Sales) and operational
             staff (as you have determined including supervisors).
         •   Overall security considerations, entrance, exit and passenger and goods vehicle flow on-
             site including parking.
         •   Waste handling and management.
         •   Utility requirements including water, electricity, plumbing etc.


THE DELIVERABLES

This project requires you to apply a systematic engineering design approach to develop a
comprehensive facilities layout (Master Facility Plan) that identifies and meets the needs of the
client.
TIPTOP has specifically asked you to include the following in your report:
1.           A set of detailed facility design requirements.
2.           A thorough capacity/demand analysis to clearly demonstrate production capacity needs.
3.           At least three alternative design solutions. All considerations must be communicated.
4.           A detailed justification of chosen design(s) including evaluation criteria.
5.           A detailed master facilities plan that includes sufficient details of workstation, material
             handling, storage, receiving, dispatch and personnel space requirements to present to
             management.
6.           A well-prepared Facility Design Report.


The report must include comprehensive evidence to indicate that you followed a systematic
Engineering Design process and summarise your key assumptions and capacity calculations.


An opportunity to explain how you approached this project will be given in an EXIT INTERVIEW
where you will have 10 minutes to explain how you approached the design problem, what you have
done practically to develop design options, and explain the logic of your Master Facility Plan. This
is not a presentation, but more question and answers session with examiners to test insight. Please
bring with the 2D layout colour printed in A2 format to use as reference.


Attached the Rubric that will be used for marking each student individually.




                                                                                                        7
INGB417 FACILITIES DESIGN

GA3 EXAM 2025


     Facilities Design – INGB417 - Examiner mark sheet for use by internal and external examiner 2025
  Student Particulars
  Surname                          Initials                                        Student number

  Examiner Particulars
  Internal or External (circle)    Initials & Surname                              Affiliation



  GA 3: Engineering Design
  Design creative solutions for complex engineering problems and design systems, components or processes to meet
  identified needs.
                                                  EVALUATION CRITERIA

                                                                     Weighting        Mark          Mark       Mark
                                                                                   (Interview)    (Report)    (Final)
 Clear interpretation of the design problem and                         /30
 formulation/calculation of design requirements or
 specifications. (includes appropriate use of analytical tools and
 techniques.)



 Practical insight shown during the design process and in the           /20
 design solution



 Sufficient detail provided in the solution to meet the design          /30
 requirements (Receiving & Dispatch, Processes, Storage,
 Offices, Support functions all in MFP)



 Effective use of a structured and rigorous design process              /10
 (Report structure corresponding to process steps



 Effective communication of the design process and solution             /10



 FINAL MARK (Interview 50: Report 50)                                  /100       Interview      Report      Total
                                                                                  mark           total       mark



                                       ASSESSMENT OF GA 3 (ENGINEERING DESIGN)
GA Achieved?
YES/NO
Comments:




Assessment Date:                                                     Signature:




                                                                                                                        8
