INGB417 FACILITIES DESIGN

GA3 EXAM 2026


Tipe Assessering/ Type of Assessment:   GA Assignment

Kwalifikasie/ Qualification:            B Eng (Industrial)
Modulekode/ Module code:                INGB417            Tydsduur/ Duration:    5-12 June 2026

Module beskrywing/ Module description: Facilities Design           Maks/ Max:             100
Eksaminator(e)/ Examiner(s):    Willemien Kruger (BEng Industrial, MEng, PrEng)
Internal Moderator:             Carla Troskie (BEng Industrial)
External Examiner:             Su-Anrie Aucamp (BEng Industrial, PrEng)



Instructions:
Read the DESIGN BRIEF as given below, then do appropriate and relevant research to develop your
FACILITY DESIGN. This is to be presented in a Facility Design Report (like the Group Assignment report),
including all relevant chapters to demonstrate your understanding of the Engineering Design process. An
online Q&A session will be held on Friday 5 June 13h00-13h30
(Teams link: https://teams.microsoft.com/l/meetup-
join/19%3ameeting_MDEwZWVjNTAtZmQ2NC00YmZmLWE2N2YtNzQ1YTIyNGY1NjA2%40thread.v2/0
?context=%7b%22Tid%22%3a%22b14d86f1-83ba-4b13-a702-
b5c0231b9337%22%2c%22Oid%22%3a%22b9f2f887-cab4-4485-8af9-242477d1508c%22%7d) to
clarify expectations and answer any questions you may have.


Your FACILITY DESIGN Report must be uploaded (pdf), to eFundi on Friday 12 June 2025 by 8h00.
Your MFP must be uploaded as 2 separate documents: the original source file (Draw.io or Rayon
format) and a PDF version. You will be penalized if both versions are not uploaded.


You do not have to submit a printed report.
The body of the report should be no longer than 40 pages. Appendices may be included and will not count
towards the 40 pages. Appendices will only be considered if they are appropriately referred to in the body of
the report. No additional files, drawings or spreadsheets will be considered by the examiners.
Remember that more words do not necessarily reflect better insight and since this subject is about a Layout
plan and the supporting key assumptions and calculations, focus on getting that right.


No changes to the report will be accepted once it is uploaded to eFundi. No late or resubmissions will be
accepted. The MFP you bring to the interview will be matched with the one submitted.


Exit interviews will be done with an examiner panel on Wednesday 17 June (8h30-16h00) as well as
Thursday 18 June 2026 (9h00-13h00). The detail schedule and venue have been communicated in the
week of 25 May 2026 for individual planning purposes. Please bring only a colour PRINTED A2 minimum
size, printed on normal paper (or larger if you wish) of the MASTER FACILITY PLAN to the interview to
be part of the discussion. Please note: If no Alternatives and/or Final MFP design was presented in the
report, GA3 is failed and no interview will be scheduled.


The main purpose of this assignment is to assess your ability to make use of a systematic engineering
design approach (as applied to facility design) as the Graduate Attribute (GA) 3 to graduate as an Industrial
Engineer. You must obtain at least 50% for the exam report as well as passing GA3. Failure to demonstrate
competence in this GA will result in failure of this assessment and the module.




                                                                                                              1
INGB417 FACILITIES DESIGN

GA3 EXAM 2026


DESIGN BRIEF:          DIGMORE mini shovel

The DigMore Co. is a shovel manufacturing company with an established history in the industry and
a broad customer base. The company’s management team decided to expand their product lines
with a new shovel design: an all-purpose folding shovel ideal for camping. With the recent surge in
market demand for this shovel design, the DigMore Co.’s current production facility does not have
sufficient capacity to produce this new product, a new facility is needed dedicated to this.
Management has asked for the plans for a new facility to make strategic decisions. You can assume
that access to the facility from public roads will be a requirement. The facility must leave about 10%
space available for future expansion needs.


DIGMORE requires you, as Industrial Engineer, to apply a systematic engineering design
approach to develop a comprehensive FACILITIES LAYOUT for the new manufacturing facility.
Apart from providing space for the main production processes, the facility needs to accept
delivery vehicles/trucks from suppliers bringing raw materials to offload, it needs to store all
materials inside the facility, as well as provide a place for customers collecting orders, or their
own trucks loading orders for delivery to customers.


THE PRODUCT – mini shovel
The shovel is similar to the design shown in Figure 1 below, with a slightly shorter handle.




                              Figure 1: Folding Shovel Concept Design The
folding shovel consists of three parts:
   •   Back of handle: 150 mm long section of round tube narrowed at one end with an external
       thread cut on this end and a knurled grip at the other end.
   •   Middle section of handle: 150 mm long section of round tube with an internal thread cut to
       connect this section of the handle to the handle grip part. This part is attached to the shovel
       head using a hinge attached with a rivet.
   •   Shovel head: The shovel head and hinge connector part are stamped from sheet metal, bent
       to the correct shape and riveted together. The finished shovel head is 150 mm long and 120
       mm wide.




                                                                                                      2
INGB417 FACILITIES DESIGN

GA3 EXAM 2026


PRODUCT AND MANUFACTURING INFORMATION

The easiest way to understand the manufacturing process is to watch the current process where a
variety of shovels are made: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vnK7-VnF_Zw
[please note that the video is for background and information purposes only]
In the new facility they will be doing things similarly, but they may need to purchase more machines
and get more labour to fulfil demand. You are required to help management with these calculations
on work and capacity demand for this particular shovel only.


Table 1 provides the main production steps with estimated production times for this shovel. Some of
these steps will be visible in the video and where not, please use own discretion and research to
make own assumptions.


Table 1: Folding Shovel Production Steps and Estimated Processing Times
 Production Step                                    Estimated Processing Time
 Cut handle                                         15 s per cut (number of pipes per cut
                                                    depends on chosen equipment)
 Internal thread on the middle section              20 s per pipe
 Stamp form the end of the grip section to narrow   5 s per pipe
 Knurling and external thread on the grip section   1 min per pipe
 Stamp hinge connector                              2 s per part
 Bend hinge connector                               5 s per part
 Stamp shovel head                                  2 s per part
 Sharpen the shovel head blade                      2 min per shovel
 Serrate shovel head blade edge                     1 min per shovel
 Shape/bend the shovel head                         2 s per shovel head
 Rivet hinge connector to shovel head               5 s per shovel
 Heat treat shovel head subassembly                 Depends on equipment
 Sandblasting shovel heads                          Depends on equipment
 Hand polish to remove burrs                        1 min per shovel head
 Powder-coat all parts (black colour)               Depends on equipment
 Assemble the shovel head and handle section        30 s per shovel
 Packaging (first into small bags that are bought   Depends on workstation design
 from an outside supplier, then into boxes)


Raw Materials and Suppliers:
The raw materials used to make the shovels are aluminium round tubes and aluminium sheets. The
current supplier for the round tube, with an outer diameter of 31.70 mm and a wall thickness of 3.18

                                                                                                  3
INGB417 FACILITIES DESIGN

GA3 EXAM 2026


mm,        is       Aluminium         Trading        (https://www.aluminiumtrading.co.za/aluminium-
extrusions/aluminiumround-tubes/). The same supplier also supplies aluminium sheets or coils of
rolled aluminium with a thickness of 2.5 mm (https://www.aluminiumtrading.co.za/rolled-aluminium-
products/), although the management team will consider a different supplier suggested by the facility
designer if preferred.


Facility Requirements:
Some specific requirements management needs are to have the powder coating in a separate totally
enclosed area within the building, as the fumes is a safety consideration.


If any other details are needed to determine space requirements, you can make assumptions. You
are also required to define your own departments to develop alternative block layouts for
management to evaluate. Process flow charts must form part of their Quality Management System.
You may use other tools and techniques to design an effective Facility Layout.


Other policies to consider include:

Manufacturing Operating Times
       The company operates for one 9-hour shift per day for 5 days a week. Operators receive a
       30-minute lunch break and two 15-minute tea breaks on a full shift. Overtime is possible if
       flexible capacity is required, but management would prefer to avoid it where possible. A total
       of 220 workdays can be assumed per year.


Inventory Levels
       The company’s inventory policy stipulates that 2 weeks’ worth of raw materials must be kept
       in stock due to long supplier lead times. Finished goods storage must be sufficient for 4 weeks
       of stock, as the company has an international market and must ship larger orders at a time.
       Work-in-Progress inventory levels and space allocation are based on the design of the facility
       and must be stipulated by the designer.


Deliveries and Collections
       The facility must make provision for small order collection on-site by customers and the
       dispatch of large orders from the facility. As the DigMore makes use of its own fleet of delivery
       trucks for large orders, space must be allocated on the premises for the truck fleet. The raw
       material delivery and finished goods dispatch schedules can be negotiated, but all deliveries
       and collections must occur during working hours on weekdays. The definition of small and
       large order units must be determined by the facility designer.

                                                                                                      4
INGB417 FACILITIES DESIGN

GA3 EXAM 2026



The management team also provided the following assumptions and constraints for the new facility:
   •   The current projected market demand is 400 000 folding shovels per year.
   •   A scrap rate of 5% each can be assumed for tube cutting and sheet stamping processes. No
       other scrap rates are required.
   •   Space must be allocated to allow for 10% expansion to meet projected growth within the next
       5 years.
   •   All packaging is performed by hand to ensure a final visual check before shipping.
   •   Powder-coating and sandblasting are assumed to have a negligible effect on the mass of the
       final products.


FACILITY DESIGN EXPECTATIONS
The following provides detail expected to see in the Final Design.

• Materials Receiving and Storage Design considerations
   •   Clear receiving space for all suppliers,
   •   storage of all raw materials and components including details of 3D space requirements
       based on calculations, material flow and layout and material handling equipment
       recommendations.
   •   Staging of materials and components at manufacturing and assembly.
• Manufacturing Operations Design
   •   Process flow charts to indicate clear understanding of the manufacturing processes required,
       including insight into bottlenecks, workstations and departments.
   •   Production capacity analysis (including detail calculations) compared to forecast demand to
       improve on process design so that the manufacturing processes can meet demand. Some
       changes will have to be made to meet future demand.
   •   Capacity analysis for all manufacturing processes including machine and personnel
       requirements organized in workstations.
   •   Recommended machinery for all critical manufacturing processes.
   •   Operator and material movement requirements including movement between manufacturing
       processes and movement of material from raw material storage to the WIP in manufacturing
       areas and then to finished goods storage. This can be summarised as flow and should be
       indicated on the final layout.
   •   Detailed workstation layout and space planning for all workstations and WIP stations where
       required.


• Finished Product Storage and Shipping Operations Design
   •   Finished product and order storage capacity including details of 3D space requirements
       based on calculations, flow and layout and equipment and materials handling
       recommendations.
   •   Clear and logical staging and dispatch operation space for customers getting their small
       orders or
   •   Shipping operations where the company has their own trucks taking large orders to
       distribution centres.




                                                                                                 5
INGB417 FACILITIES DESIGN

GA3 EXAM 2026


• Supporting Facilities & Services Design
     •    Overall security considerations, entrance, exit and goods vehicle flow on-site including
          parking.
     •    Parking facilities for all employees on site. Personnel include the facility’s management,
          administrative staff, security personnel and operators. Reasoning and calculations for
          determining parking space must be provided.
     •    Restrooms, lockers and cafeteria access must be available to all personnel.
     •    Office space must be allocated to the Senior Plant Manager, Operations Manager, Inventory
          Manager, the administrative team, including Reception, Purchasing, Sales, Finance,
          Marketing and Human Resources employees, and the plant supervisors. The number of
          supervisors will depend on the facility design and must be clarified by the design team.

     •    Waste handling and management.
     •    Utility requirements including water, electricity, plumbing etc.


THE DELIVERABLES

This project requires you to apply a systematic engineering design approach to develop a
comprehensive facilities layout (Master Facility Plan) that identifies and meets the needs of the
client.
DIGMORE has specifically asked you to include the following in your report:
1.        A set of detailed facility design requirements.
2.        A thorough capacity/demand analysis to clearly demonstrate production capacity needs.
3.        At least three alternative design solutions. All considerations must be communicated.
4.        A detailed justification of chosen design(s) including evaluation criteria.
5.        A detailed master facilities plan that includes sufficient details of workstation, material
          handling, storage, receiving, dispatch and personnel space requirements to present to
          management.
6.        A well-prepared Facility Design Report.


The report must include comprehensive evidence to indicate that you followed a systematic
Engineering Design process and summarise your key assumptions and capacity calculations.


An opportunity to explain how you approached this project will be given in an EXIT INTERVIEW
where you will have 10 minutes to explain how you approached the design problem, what you have
done practically to develop design options, and explain the logic of your Master Facility Plan. This
is not a presentation, but question and answers session with examiners to test insight. Remember
to bring with the 2D layout colour printed in A2 format (min size) to use as reference.


Attached the Rubric that will be used for marking each student individually.


                                                                                                    6
INGB417 FACILITIES DESIGN

GA3 EXAM 2026



                Facilities Design – INGB417 – Examiner & Moderator mark sheet for use in 2026
  Student details
  Initials                Surname                                                Student number


  Examiner or Moderator details (circle)
  Initials                Surname                                                Internal or External (circle)



  GA 3: Engineering Design
  Design creative solutions for complex engineering problems and design systems , components or processes
  to meet identified needs.


  EVALUATION CRITERIA
                                                                                   Weighting          Mark          Mark
                                                                                                   (Interview)    (Report)
  Clear interpretation of the design problem and formulation/calculation of            /30
  design requirements or specifications. (includes appropriate use of
  analytical tools and techniques.)



  Practical insight shown during the design process and demonstrate the /20          ability to
  justify assumptions and decisions made in the design solution



  Defendable final design solution to meet the design requirements /30
  (Receiving & Dispatch, Production processes, Storage, Warehouses,
  Offices, Support functions all in MFP)



  Effective application of a structured and rigorous design process, /10
  including comparing alternatives systematically and selecting a final design
  based on defensible criteria




  Effective communication of the design process and solution                           /10



  FINAL MARK (Interview 50: Report 50)                                                /100        Interview      Report
                                                                                                  mark           total


  Moderators / examiners comments and marks



                                                                                   FINAL MARK


                                       ASSESSMENT OF GA 3 (ENGINEERING DESIGN)

 GA Achieved?
 YES/NO

                                                                                                                             7
INGB417 FACILITIES DESIGN

GA3 EXAM 2026


 Comments:




 Assessment Dat e:          Signature:




                                         8
